

"What did you take her, Hans?"

"I took nothing, but I brought away something."

"What did Grethel give you, Hans?"

"A goat, mother."

"What did you do with it, Hans?"

"Put it in my pocket, mother."

"That was very stupid of you, Hans. You should have tied a cord round
its neck, and led it home."

"All right, mother! I'll do better next time."

Then when next time came,

"Where to, Hans?"

"To Grethel's, mother."

"Manage well, Hans."

"All right! Good-bye, mother."

"Good-bye, Hans."

Then Hans came to Grethel's.

"Good morning, Grethel."

"Good morning, Hans. What have you brought me to-day?"

"I've brought nothing, but I want to take away something."

So Grethel gave Hans a piece of bacon. Then he said, "Good-bye,
Grethel."

She said, "Good-bye, Hans."

Hans took the bacon, and tied a string round it, and dragged it after
him on his way home, and the dogs came and ate it up, so that when he
got home he had the string in his hand, and nothing at the other end of
it.

"Good evening, mother."

"Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?"

"To Grethel's, mother."

"What did you take her, Hans?"

"I took her nothing, but I brought away something."

"What did Grethel give you, Hans?"

"A piece of bacon, mother."

"What did you do with it, Hans?"

"I tied a piece of string to it, and led it home, but the dogs ate it,
mother."

"That was very stupid of you, Hans. You ought to have carried it on your
head."

"All right! I'll do better next time, mother."

When next time came,

"Where to, Hans?"

"To Grethel's, mother."

"Manage well, Hans."

"All right! Good-bye, mother."

"Good-bye, Hans."

Then Hans came to Grethel's.

"Good morning, Grethel."

"Good morning, Hans. What have you brought me?"

"I have brought nothing, but I want to take away something."

So Grethel gave Hans a calf.

"Good-bye, Grethel."

"Good-bye, Hans."

Hans took the calf, and set it on his head, and carried it home, and the
calf scratched his face.

"Good evening, mother."

"Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?"

"To Grethel's, mother."

"What did you take her?"

"I took nothing, but I brought away something."

"What did Grethel give you, Hans?"

"A calf, mother."

"What did you do with the calf, Hans?"

"I carried it home on my head, but it scratched my face."

"That was very stupid of you, Hans. You ought to have led home the calf,
and tied it to the manger."

"All right! I'll do better next time, mother."

When next time came,

"Where to, Hans?"

"To Grethel's, mother."

"Manage well, Hans."

"All right, mother! Good-bye."

"Good-bye, Hans."

Then Hans came to Grethel's.

"Good morning, Grethel."

"Good morning, Hans. What have you brought me to-day?"

"I have brought nothing, but I want to take away something."

Then Grethel said to Hans,

"You shall take away me."

Then Hans took Grethel, and tied a rope round her neck, and led her
home, and fastened her up to the manger, and went to his mother.

"Good evening, mother."

"Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?"

"To Grethel's, mother."

"What did you take her, Hans?"

"Nothing, mother."

"What did Grethel give you, Hans?"

"Nothing but herself, mother."

"Where have you left Grethel, Hans?"

"I led her home with a rope, and tied her up to the manger to eat hay,
mother."

"That was very stupid of you, Hans. You should have cast sheep's eyes at
her."

"All right, mother! I'll do better next time."

Then Hans went into the stable, and taking all the eyes out of the
sheep, he threw them in Grethel's face. Then Grethel was angry, and
getting loose, she ran away and became the bride of another.




CLEVER ELSE


THERE was once a man who had a daughter who was called "Clever Else,"
and when she was grown up, her father said she must be married, and her
mother said,

"Yes, if we could only find some one that she would consent to have."

At last one came from a distance, and his name was Hans, and when he
proposed to her, he made it a condition that Clever Else should be very
careful as well.

"Oh," said the father, "she does not want for brains."

"No, indeed," said the mother, "she can see the wind coming up the
street and hear the flies cough."

"Well," said Hans, "if she does not turn out to be careful too, I will
not have her."

Now when they were all seated at table, and had well eaten, the mother
said,

"Else, go into the cellar and draw some beer."

Then Clever Else took down the jug from the hook in the wall, and as she
was on her way to the cellar she rattled the lid up and down so as to
pass away the time. When she got there, she took a stool and stood it in
front of the cask, so that she need not stoop and make her back ache
with needless trouble. Then she put the jug under the tap and turned it,
and while the beer was running, in order that her eyes should not be
idle, she glanced hither and thither, and finally caught sight of a
pickaxe that the workmen had left sticking in the ceiling just above
her head. Then Clever Else began to cry, for she thought,

"If I marry Hans, and we have a child, and it grows big, and we send it
into the cellar to draw beer, that pickaxe might fall on his head and
kill him."

So there she sat and cried with all her might, lamenting the anticipated
misfortune. All the while they were waiting upstairs for something to
drink, and they waited in vain. At last the mistress said to the maid,

"Go down to the cellar and see why Else does not come."

So the maid went, and found her sitting in front of the cask crying with
all her might.

"What are you crying for?" said the maid.

"Oh dear me," answered she, "how can I help crying? if I marry Hans, and
we have a child, and it grows big, and we send it here to draw beer,
perhaps the pickaxe may fall on its head and kill it."

"Our Else is clever indeed!" said the maid, and directly sat down to
bewail the anticipated misfortune. After a while, when the people
upstairs found that the maid did not return, and they were becoming more
and more thirsty, the master said to the boy,

"You go down into the cellar, and see what Else and the maid are doing."

The boy did so, and there he found both Clever Else and the maid sitting
crying together. Then he asked what was the matter.

"Oh dear me," said Else, "how can we help crying? if I marry Hans, and
we have a child, and it grows big, and we send it here to draw beer, the
pickaxe might fall on its head and kill it."

"Our Else is clever indeed!" said the boy, and sitting down beside her,
he began howling with a good will. Upstairs they were all waiting for
him to come back, but as he did not come, the master said to the
mistress,

"You go down to the cellar and see what Else is doing."

So the mistress went down and found all three in great lamentations, and
when she asked the cause, then Else told her how the future possible
child might be killed as soon as it was big enough to be sent to draw
beer, by the pickaxe falling on it. Then the mother at once exclaimed,

"Our Else is clever indeed!" and, sitting down, she wept with the rest.

Upstairs the husband waited a little while, but as his wife did not
return, and as his thirst constantly increased, he said,

"I must go down to the cellar myself, and see what has become of Else."
And when he came into the cellar, and found them all sitting and weeping
together, he was told that it was all owing to the child that Else might
possibly have, and the possibility of its being killed by the pickaxe so
happening to fall just at the time the child might be sitting underneath
it drawing beer; and when he heard all this, he cried,

"How clever is our Else!" and sitting down, he joined his tears to
theirs.

The intended bridegroom stayed upstairs by himself a long time, but as
nobody came back to him, he thought he would go himself and see what
they were all about. And there he found all five lamenting and crying
most pitifully, each one louder than the other.

"What misfortune has happened?" cried he.

"O my dear Hans," said Else, "if we marry and have a child, and it grows
big, and we send it down here to draw beer, perhaps that pickaxe which
has been left sticking up there might fall down on the child's head and
kill it; and how can we help crying at that!"

"Now," said Hans, "I cannot think that greater sense than that could be
wanted in my household; so as you are so clever, Else, I will have you
for my wife," and taking her by the hand he led her upstairs, and they
had the wedding at once.

A little while after they were married, Hans said to his wife,

"I am going out to work, in order to get money; you go into the field
and cut the corn, so that we may have bread."

"Very well, I will do so, dear Hans," said she. And after Hans was gone
she cooked herself some nice stew, and took it with her into the field.
And when she got there, she said to herself,

"Now, what shall I do? shall I reap first, or eat first? All right, I
will eat first." Then she ate her fill of stew, and when she could eat
no more, she said to herself,

"Now, what shall I do? shall I reap first, or sleep first? All right, I
will sleep first." Then she lay down in the corn and went to sleep. And
Hans got home, and waited there a long while, and Else did not come, so
he said to himself,

"My clever Else is so industrious that she never thinks of coming home
and eating."

But when evening drew near and still she did not come, Hans set out to
see how much corn she had cut; but she had cut no corn at all, but there
she was lying in it asleep. Then Hans made haste home, and fetched a
bird-net with little bells and threw it over her; and still she went on
sleeping. And he ran home again and locked himself in, and sat him down
on his bench to work. At last, when it was beginning to grow dark,
Clever Else woke, and when she got up and shook herself, the bells
jingled at each movement that she made. Then she grew frightened, and
began to doubt whether she were really Clever Else or not, and said to
herself,

"Am I, or am I not?" And, not knowing what answer to make, she stood for
a long while considering; at last she thought,

"I will go home to Hans and ask him if I am I or not; he is sure to
know."

So she ran up to the door of her house, but it was locked; then she
knocked at the window, and cried,

"Hans, is Else within?"

"Yes," answered Hans, "she is in."

Then she was in a greater fright than ever, and crying,

"Oh dear, then I am not I," she went to inquire at another door, but the
people hearing the jingling of the bells would not open to her, and she
could get in nowhere. So she ran away beyond the village, and since then
no one has seen her.




The TABLE, the ASS, and the STICK.


THERE was once a tailor who had three sons and one goat. And the goat,
as she nourished them all with her milk, was obliged to have good food,
and so she was led every day down to the willows by the water-side; and
this business the sons did in turn. One day the eldest took the goat to
the churchyard, where the best sprouts are, that she might eat her fill,
and gambol about.

In the evening, when it was time to go home, he said,

"Well, goat, have you had enough?"

The goat answered,

    "I am so full,
    I cannot pull
    Another blade of grass--ba! baa!"

"Then come home," said the youth, and fastened a string to her, led her
to her stall, and fastened her up.

"Now," said the old tailor, "has the goat had her proper food?"

"Oh," answered the son, "she is so full, she no more can pull."

But the father, wishing to see for himself, went out to the stall,
stroked his dear goat, and said,

"My dear goat, are you full?" And the goat answered,

    "How can I be full?
    There was nothing to pull,
    Though I looked all about me--ba! baa!"

"What is this that I hear?" cried the tailor, and he ran and called out
to the youth,

"O you liar, to say that the goat was full, and she has been hungry all
the time!" And in his wrath he took up his yard-measure and drove his
son out of the house with many blows.

The next day came the turn of the second son, and he found a fine place
in the garden hedge, where there were good green sprouts, and the goat
ate them all up. In the evening, when he came to lead her home, he said,

"Well, goat, have you had enough?" And the goat answered,

    "I am so full,
    I could not pull
    Another blade of grass--ba! baa!"

"Then come home," said the youth, and led her home, and tied her up.

"Now," said the old tailor, "has the goat had her proper food?"

"Oh," answered the son, "she is so full, she no more can pull."

The tailor, not feeling satisfied, went out to the stall, and said,

"My dear goat, are you really full?" And the goat answered,

    "How can I be full?
    There was nothing to pull,
    Though I looked all about me--ba! baa!"

"The good-for-nothing rascal," cried the tailor, "to let the dear
creature go fasting!" and, running back, he chased the youth with his
yard-wand out of the house.

Then came the turn of the third son, who, meaning to make all sure,
found some shrubs with the finest sprouts possible, and left the goat to
devour them. In the evening, when he came to lead her home, he said,

"Well, goat, are you full?" And the goat answered,

    "I am so full,
    I could not pull
    Another blade of grass--ba! baa!"

"Then come home," said the youth; and he took her to her stall, and
fastened her up.

"Now," said the old tailor, "has the goat had her proper food?"

"Oh," answered the son, "she is so full, she no more can pull."

But the tailor, not trusting his word, went to the goat and said,

"My dear goat, are you really full?" The malicious animal answered,

    "How can I be full?
    There was nothing to pull,
    Though I looked all about me--ba! baa!"

"Oh, the wretches!" cried the tailor. "The one as good-for-nothing and
careless as the other. I will no longer have such fools about me;" and
rushing back, in his wrath he laid about him with his yard-wand, and
belaboured his son's back so unmercifully that he ran away out of the
house.

So the old tailor was left alone with the goat. The next day he went out
to the stall, and let out the goat, saying,

"Come, my dear creature, I will take you myself to the willows."

So he led her by the string, and brought her to the green hedges and
pastures where there was plenty of food to her taste, and saying to her,

"Now, for once, you can eat to your heart's content," he left her there
till the evening. Then he returned, and said,

"Well, goat, are you full?"

She answered,

    "I am so full,
    I could not pull,
    Another blade of grass--ba! baa!"

"Then come home," said the tailor, and leading her to her stall, he
fastened her up.

Before he left her he turned once more, saying,

"Now then, for once you are full." But the goat actually cried,

    "How can I be full?
    There was nothing to pull,
    Though I looked all about me--ba! baa!"

When the tailor heard that he marvelled, and saw at once that his three
sons had been sent away without reason.

"Wait a minute," cried he, "you ungrateful creature! It is not enough
merely to drive you away--I will teach you to show your face again among
honourable tailors."

So in haste he went and fetched his razor, and seizing the goat he
shaved her head as smooth as the palm of his hand. And as the
yard-measure was too honourable a weapon, he took the whip and fetched
her such a crack that with many a jump and spring she ran away.

The tailor felt very sad as he sat alone in his house, and would
willingly have had his sons back again, but no one knew where they had
gone.

The eldest son, when he was driven from home, apprenticed himself to a
joiner, and he applied himself diligently to his trade, and when the
time came for him to travel his master gave him a little table, nothing
much to look at, and made of common wood; but it had one great quality.
When any one set it down and said, "Table, be covered!" all at once the
good little table had a clean cloth on it, and a plate, and knife, and
fork, and dishes with roast and boiled, and a large glass of red wine
sparkling so as to cheer the heart. The young apprentice thought he was
set up for life, and he went merrily out into the world, and never cared
whether an inn were good or bad, or whether he could get anything to eat
there or not. When he was hungry, it did not matter where he was,
whether in the fields, in the woods, or in a meadow, he set down his
table and said, "Be covered!" and there he was provided with everything
that heart could wish. At last it occurred to him that he would go back
to his father, whose wrath might by this time have subsided, and perhaps
because of the wonderful table he might receive him again gladly. It
happened that one evening during his journey home he came to an inn that
was quite full of guests, who bade him welcome, and asked him to sit
down with them and eat, as otherwise he would have found some difficulty
in getting anything.

"No," answered the young joiner, "I could not think of depriving you;
you had much better be my guests."

Then they laughed, and thought he must be joking. But he brought his
little wooden table, and put it in the middle of the room, and said,
"Table, be covered!" Immediately it was set out with food much better
than the landlord had been able to provide, and the good smell of it
greeted the noses of the guests very agreeably. "Fall to, good friends,"
said the joiner; and the guests, when they saw how it was, needed no
second asking, but taking up knife and fork fell to valiantly. And what
seemed most wonderful was that when a dish was empty immediately a full
one stood in its place. All the while the landlord stood in a corner,
and watched all that went on. He could not tell what to say about it;
but he thought "such cooking as that would make my inn prosper." The
joiner and his fellowship kept it up very merrily until late at night.
At last they went to sleep, and the young joiner, going to bed, left his
wishing-table standing against the wall. The landlord, however, could
not sleep for thinking of the table, and he remembered that there was in
his lumber room an old table very like it, so he fetched it, and taking
away the joiner's table, he left the other in its place. The next
morning the joiner paid his reckoning, took up the table, not dreaming
that he was carrying off the wrong one, and went on his way. About noon
he reached home, and his father received him with great joy.

"Now, my dear son, what have you learned?" said he to him.

"I have learned to be a joiner, father," he answered.

"That is a good trade," returned the father; "but what have you brought
back with you from your travels?"

"The best thing I've got, father, is this little table," said he.

The tailor looked at it on all sides, and said,

"You have certainly produced no masterpiece. It is a rubbishing old
table."

"But it is a very wonderful one," answered the son. "When I set it down,
and tell it to be covered, at once the finest meats are standing on it,
and wine so good that it cheers the heart. Let us invite all the friends
and neighbours, that they may feast and enjoy themselves, for the table
will provide enough for all."

When the company was all assembled, he put his table in the middle of
the room, and said, "Table, be covered!"

But the table never stirred, and remained just as empty as any other
table that does not understand talking. When the poor joiner saw that
the table remained unfurnished, he felt ashamed to stand there like a
fool. The company laughed at him freely, and were obliged to return
unfilled and uncheered to their houses. The father gathered his pieces
together and returned to his tailoring, and the son went to work under
another master.

The second son had bound himself apprentice to a miller. And when his
time was up, his master said to him,

"As you have behaved yourself so well, I will give you an ass of a
remarkable kind: he will draw no cart, and carry no sack."

"What is the good of him then?" asked the young apprentice.

"He spits out gold," answered the miller. "If you put a cloth before him
and say, 'Bricklebrit,' out come gold pieces."

"That is a capital thing," said the apprentice, and, thanking his
master, he went out into the world. Whenever he wanted gold he had only
to say "Bricklebrit" to his ass, and there was a shower of gold pieces,
and so he had no cares as he travelled about. Wherever he came he lived
on the best, and the dearer the better, as his purse was always full.
And when he had been looking about him about the world a long time, he
thought he would go and find out his father, who would perhaps forget
his anger and receive him kindly because of his gold ass. And it
happened that he came to lodge in the same inn where his brother's table
had been exchanged. He was leading his ass in his hand, and the landlord
was for taking the ass from him to tie it up, but the young apprentice
said,

"Don't trouble yourself, old fellow, I will take him into the stable
myself and tie him up, and then I shall know where to find him."

The landlord thought this was very strange, and he never supposed that a
man who was accustomed to look after his ass himself could have much to
spend; but when the stranger, feeling in his pocket, took out two gold
pieces and told him to get him something good for supper; the landlord
stared, and ran and fetched the best that could be got. After supper the
guest called the reckoning, and the landlord, wanting to get all the
profit he could, said that it would amount to two gold pieces more. The
apprentice felt in his pocket, but his gold had come to an end.

"Wait a moment, landlord," said he, "I will go and fetch some money,"
and he went out of the room, carrying the table-cloth with him. The
landlord could not tell what to make of it, and, curious to know his
proceedings, slipped after him, and as the guest shut the stable-door,
he peeped in through a knot-hole. Then he saw how the stranger spread
the cloth before the ass, saying, "Bricklebrit," and directly the ass
spat out gold, which rained upon the ground.

"Dear me," said the landlord, "that is an easy way of getting ducats; a
purse of money like that is no bad thing."

After that the guest paid his reckoning and went to bed; but the
landlord slipped down to the stable in the middle of the night, led the
gold-ass away, and tied up another ass in his place. The next morning
early the apprentice set forth with his ass, never doubting that it was
the right one. By noon he came to his father's house, who was rejoiced
to see him again, and received him gladly.

"What trade have you taken up, my son?" asked the father.

"I am a miller, dear father," answered he.

"What have you brought home from your travels?" continued the father.

"Nothing but an ass," answered the son.

"We have plenty of asses here," said the father. "You had much better
have brought me a nice goat!"

"Yes," answered the son, "but this is no common ass. When I say,
'Bricklebrit,' the good creature spits out a whole clothful of gold
pieces. Let me call all the neighbours together. I will make rich people
of them all."

"That will be fine!" said the tailor. "Then I need labour no more at my
needle;" and he rushed out himself and called the neighbours together.
As soon as they were all assembled, the miller called out to them to
make room, and brought in the ass, and spread his cloth before him.

"Now, pay attention," said he, and cried, "Bricklebrit!" but no gold
pieces came, and that showed that the animal was not more scientific
than any other ass.

So the poor miller made a long face when he saw that he had been taken
in, and begged pardon of the neighbours, who all went home as poor as
they had come. And there was nothing for it but that the old man must
take to his needle again, and that the young one should take service
with a miller.

The third brother had bound himself apprentice to a turner; and as
turning is a very ingenious handicraft, it took him a long time to learn
it. His brother told him in a letter how badly things had gone with
them, and how on the last night of their travels the landlord deprived
them of their treasures. When the young turner had learnt his trade, and
was ready to travel, his master, to reward him for his good conduct,
gave him a sack, and told him that there was a stick inside it.

"I can hang up the sack, and it may be very useful to me," said the
young man. "But what is the good of the stick?"

"I will tell you," answered the master. "If any one does you any harm,
and you say, 'Stick, out of the sack!' the stick will jump out upon
them, and will belabour them so soundly that they shall not be able to
move or to leave the place for a week, and it will not stop until you
say, 'Stick, into the sack!'"

The apprentice thanked him, and took up the sack and started on his
travels, and when any one attacked him he would say, "Stick, out of the
sack!" and directly out jumped the stick, and dealt a shower of blows on
the coat or jerkin, and the back beneath, which quickly ended the
affair. One evening the young turner reached the inn where his two
brothers had been taken in. He laid his knapsack on the table, and began
to describe all the wonderful things he had seen in the world.

"Yes," said he, "you may talk of your self-spreading table,
gold-supplying ass, and so forth; very good things, I do not deny, but
they are nothing in comparison with the treasure that I have acquired
and carry with me in that sack!"

Then the landlord opened his ears.

"What in the world can it be?" thought he. "Very likely the sack is full
of precious stones; and I have a perfect right to it, for all good
things come in threes."

When bedtime came the guest stretched himself on a bench, and put his
sack under his head for a pillow, and the landlord, when he thought the
young man was sound asleep, came, and, stooping down, pulled gently at
the sack, so as to remove it cautiously, and put another in its place.
The turner had only been waiting for this to happen, and just as the
landlord was giving a last courageous pull, he cried, "Stick, out of the
sack!" Out flew the stick directly, and laid to heartily on the
landlord's back; and in vain he begged for mercy; the louder he cried
the harder the stick beat time on his back, until he fell exhausted to
the ground. Then the turner said,

"If you do not give me the table and the ass directly, this game shall
begin all over again."

"Oh dear, no!" cried the landlord, quite collapsed; "I will gladly give
it all back again if you will only make this terrible goblin go back
into the sack."

Then said the young man, "I will be generous instead of just, but
beware!" Then he cried, "Stick, into the sack!" and left him in peace.

The next morning the turner set out with the table and the ass on his
way home to his father. The tailor was very glad, indeed, to see him
again, and asked him what he had learned abroad.

"My dear father," answered he, "I am become a turner."

"A very ingenious handicraft," said the father. "And what have you
brought with you from your travels?"

"A very valuable thing, dear father," answered the son. "A stick in a
sack!"

"What!" cried the father. "A stick! The thing is not worth so much
trouble when you can cut one from any tree."

"But it is not a common stick, dear father," said the young man. "When I
say, 'Stick, out of the bag!' out jumps the stick upon any one who means
harm to me, and makes him dance again, and does not leave off till he
is beaten to the earth, and asks pardon. Just look here, with this stick
I have recovered the table and the ass which the thieving landlord had
taken from my two brothers. Now, let them both be sent for, and bid all
the neighbours too, and they shall eat and drink to their hearts'
content, and I will fill their pockets with gold."

The old tailor could not quite believe in such a thing, but he called
his sons and all the neighbours together. Then the turner brought in the
ass, opened a cloth before him, and said to his brother,

"Now, my dear brother, speak to him." And the miller said,
"Bricklebrit!" and immediately the cloth was covered with gold pieces,
until they had all got more than they could carry away. (I tell you this
because it is a pity you were not there.) Then the turner set down the
table, and said,

"Now, my dear brother, speak to it." And the joiner said, "Table, be
covered!" and directly it was covered, and set forth plentifully with
the richest dishes. Then they held a feast such as had never taken place
in the tailor's house before, and the whole company remained through the
night, merry and content.

The tailor after that locked up in a cupboard his needle and thread, his
yard-measure and goose, and lived ever after with his three sons in
great joy and splendour.

But what became of the goat, the unlucky cause of the tailor's sons
being driven out? I will tell you. She felt so ashamed of her bald head
that she ran into a fox's hole and hid herself. When the fox came home
he caught sight of two great eyes staring at him out of the darkness,
and was very frightened and ran away. A bear met him, and seeing that he
looked very disturbed, asked him,

"What is the matter, brother fox, that you should look like that?"

"Oh dear," answered the fox, "a grisly beast is sitting in my hole, and
he stared at me with fiery eyes!"

"We will soon drive him out," said the bear; and went to the hole and
looked in, but when he caught sight of the fiery eyes he likewise felt
great terror seize him, and not wishing to have anything to do with so
grisly a beast, he made off. He was soon met by a bee, who remarked
that he had not a very courageous air, and said to him,

"Bear, you have a very depressed countenance, what has become of your
high spirit?"

"You may well ask," answered the bear. "In the fox's hole there sits a
grisly beast with fiery eyes, and we cannot drive him out."

The bee answered, "I know you despise me, bear. I am a poor feeble
little creature, but I think I can help you."

So she flew into the fox's hole, and settling on the goat's
smooth-shaven head, stung her so severely that she jumped up, crying,
"Ba-baa!" and ran out like mad into the world; and to this hour no one
knows where she ran to.




TOM THUMB


THERE was once a poor countryman who used to sit in the chimney-corner
all evening and poke the fire, while his wife sat at her spinning-wheel.

And he used to say,

"How dull it is without any children about us; our house is so quiet,
and other people's houses so noisy and merry!"

"Yes," answered his wife, and sighed, "if we could only have one, and
that one ever so little, no bigger than my thumb, how happy I should be!
It would, indeed, be having our heart's desire."

Now, it happened that after a while the woman had a child who was
perfect in all his limbs, but no bigger than a thumb. Then the parents
said,

"He is just what we wished for, and we will love him very much," and
they named him according to his stature, "Tom Thumb." And though they
gave him plenty of nourishment, he grew no bigger, but remained exactly
the same size as when he was first born; and he had very good faculties,
and was very quick and prudent, so that all he did prospered.

One day his father made ready to go into the forest to cut wood, and he
said, as if to himself,

"Now, I wish there was some one to bring the cart to meet me."

"O father," cried Tom Thumb, "I can bring the cart, let me alone for
that, and in proper time, too!"

Then the father laughed, and said,

"How will you manage that? You are much too little to hold the reins."

"That has nothing to do with it, father; while my mother goes on with
her spinning I will sit in the horse's ear and tell him where to go."

"Well," answered the father, "we will try it for once."

When it was time to set off, the mother went on spinning, after setting
Tom Thumb in the horse's ear; and so he drove off, crying,

"Gee-up, gee-wo!"

So the horse went on quite as if his master were driving him, and drew
the waggon along the right road to the wood.

Now it happened just as they turned a corner, and the little fellow was
calling out "Gee-up!" that two strange men passed by.

"Look," said one of them, "how is this? There goes a waggon, and the
driver is calling to the horse, and yet he is nowhere to be seen."

"It is very strange," said the other; "we will follow the waggon, and
see where it belongs."

And the waggon went right through the wood, up to the place where the
wood had been hewed. When Tom Thumb caught sight of his father, he cried
out,

"Look, father, here am I with the waggon; now, take me down."

The father held the horse with his left hand, and with the right he
lifted down his little son out of the horse's ear, and Tom Thumb sat
down on a stump, quite happy and content. When the two strangers saw him
they were struck dumb with wonder. At last one of them, taking the other
aside, said to him, "Look here, the little chap would make our fortune
if we were to show him in the town for money. Suppose we buy him."

So they went up to the woodcutter, and said,

"Sell the little man to us; we will take care he shall come to no harm."

"No," answered the father; "he is the apple of my eye, and not for all
the money in the world would I sell him."

But Tom Thumb, when he heard what was going on, climbed up by his
father's coat tails, and, perching himself on his shoulder, he whispered
in his ear,

"Father, you might as well let me go. I will soon come back again."

Then the father gave him up to the two men for a large piece of money.
They asked him where he would like to sit,

"Oh, put me on the brim of your hat," said he. "There I can walk about
and view the country, and be in no danger of falling off."

So they did as he wished, and when Tom Thumb had taken leave of his
father, they set off all together. And they travelled on until it grew
dusk, and the little fellow asked to be set down a little while for a
change, and after some difficulty they consented. So the man took him
down from his hat, and set him in a field by the roadside, and he ran
away directly, and, after creeping about among the furrows, he slipped
suddenly into a mouse-hole, just what he was looking for.

"Good evening, my masters, you can go home without me!" cried he to
them, laughing. They ran up and felt about with their sticks in the
mouse-hole, but in vain. Tom Thumb crept farther and farther in, and as
it was growing dark, they had to make the best of their way home, full
of vexation, and with empty purses.

When Tom Thumb found they were gone, he crept out of his hiding-place
underground.

"It is dangerous work groping about these holes in the darkness," said
he; "I might easily break my neck."

But by good fortune he came upon an empty snail shell.

"That's all right," said he. "Now I can get safely through the night;"
and he settled himself down in it. Before he had time to get to sleep,
he heard two men pass by, and one was saying to the other,

"How can we manage to get hold of the rich parson's gold and silver?"

"I can tell you how," cried Tom Thumb.

"How is this?" said one of the thieves, quite frightened, "I hear some
one speak!"

So they stood still and listened, and Tom Thumb spoke again.

"Take me with you; I will show you how to do it!"

"Where are you, then?" asked they.

"Look about on the ground and notice where the voice comes from,"
answered he.

At last they found him, and lifted him up.

"You little elf," said they, "how can you help us?"

"Look here," answered he, "I can easily creep between the iron bars of
the parson's room and hand out to you whatever you would like to have."

"Very well," said they, "we will try what you can do."

So when they came to the parsonage-house, Tom Thumb crept into the room,
but cried out with all his might,

"Will you have all that is here?" So the thieves were terrified, and
said,

"Do speak more softly, lest any one should be awaked."

But Tom Thumb made as if he did not hear them, and cried out again,

"What would you like? will you have all that is here?" so that the cook,
who was sleeping in a room hard by, heard it, and raised herself in bed
and listened. The thieves, however, in their fear of being discovered,
had run back part of the way, but they took courage again, thinking that
it was only a jest of the little fellow's. So they came back and
whispered to him to be serious, and to hand them out something.

Then Tom Thumb called out once more as loud as he could,

"Oh yes, I will give it all to you, only put out your hands."

Then the listening maid heard him distinctly that time, and jumped out
of bed, and burst open the door. The thieves ran off as if the wild
huntsman were behind them; but the maid, as she could see nothing, went
to fetch a light. And when she came back with one, Tom Thumb had taken
himself off, without being seen by her, into the barn; and the maid,
when she had looked in every hole and corner and found nothing, went
back to bed at last, and thought that she must have been dreaming with
her eyes and ears open.

So Tom Thumb crept among the hay, and found a comfortable nook to sleep
in, where he intended to remain until it was day, and then to go home to
his father and mother. But other things were to befall him; indeed,
there is nothing but trouble and worry in this world! The maid got up
at dawn of day to feed the cows. The first place she went to was the
barn, where she took up an armful of hay, and it happened to be the very
heap in which Tom Thumb lay asleep. And he was so fast asleep, that he
was aware of nothing, and never waked until he was in the mouth of the
cow, who had taken him up with the hay.

"Oh dear," cried he, "how is it that I have got into a mill!" but he
soon found out where he was, and he had to be very careful not to get
between the cow's teeth, and at last he had to descend into the cow's
stomach.

"The windows were forgotten when this little room was built," said he,
"and the sunshine cannot get in; there is no light to be had."

His quarters were in every way unpleasant to him, and, what was the
worst, new hay was constantly coming in, and the space was being filled
up. At last he cried out in his extremity, as loud as he could,

"No more hay for me! no more hay for me!"

The maid was then milking the cow, and as she heard a voice, but could
see no one, and as it was the same voice that she had heard in the
night, she was so frightened that she fell off her stool, and spilt the
milk. Then she ran in great haste to her master, crying,

"Oh, master dear, the cow spoke!"

"You must be crazy," answered her master, and he went himself to the
cow-house to see what was the matter. No sooner had he put his foot
inside the door, than Tom Thumb cried out again,

"No more hay for me! no more hay for me!"

Then the parson himself was frightened, supposing that a bad spirit had
entered into the cow, and he ordered her to be put to death. So she was
killed, but the stomach, where Tom Thumb was lying, was thrown upon a
dunghill. Tom Thumb had great trouble to work his way out of it, and he
had just made a space big enough for his head to go through, when a new
misfortune happened. A hungry wolf ran up and swallowed the whole
stomach at one gulp. But Tom Thumb did not lose courage. "Perhaps,"
thought he, "the wolf will listen to reason," and he cried out from the
inside of the wolf,

"My dear wolf, I can tell you where to get a splendid meal!"

"Where is it to be had?" asked the wolf.

"In such and such a house, and you must creep into it through the drain,
and there you will find cakes and bacon and broth, as much as you can
eat," and he described to him His father's house. The wolf needed not to
be told twice. He squeezed himself through the drain in the night, and
feasted in the store-room to his heart's content. When, at last, he was
satisfied, he wanted to go away again, but he had become so big, that to
creep the same way back was impossible. This Tom Thumb had reckoned
upon, and began to make a terrible din inside the wolf, crying and
calling as loud as he could.

"Will you be quiet?" said the wolf; "you will wake the folks up!"

"Look here," cried the little man, "you are very well satisfied, and now
I will do something for my own enjoyment," and began again to make all
the noise he could. At last the father and mother were awakened, and
they ran to the room-door and peeped through the chink, and when they
saw a wolf in occupation, they ran and fetched weapons--the man an axe,
and the wife a scythe.

"Stay behind," said the man, as they entered the room; "when I have
given him a blow, and it does not seem to have killed him, then you must
cut at him with your scythe."

Then Tom Thumb heard his father's voice, and cried,

"Dear father, I am here in the wolf's inside."

Then the father called out full of joy,

"Thank heaven that we have found our dear child!" and told his wife to
keep the scythe out of the way, lest Tom Thumb should be hurt with it.
Then he drew near and struck the wolf such a blow on the head that he
fell down dead; and then he fetched a knife and a pair of scissors, slit
up the wolf's body, and let out the little fellow.

"Oh, what anxiety we have felt about you!" said the father.

"Yes, father, I have seen a good deal of the world, and I am very glad
to breathe fresh air again."

"And where have you been all this time?" asked his father.

"Oh, I have been in a mouse-hole and a snail's shell, in a cow's stomach
and a wolf's inside: now, I think, I will stay at home."

"And we will not part with you for all the kingdoms of the world," cried
the parents, as they kissed and hugged their dear little Tom Thumb. And
they gave him something to eat and drink, and a new suit of clothes, as
his old ones were soiled with travel.




HOW MRS FOX MARRIED AGAIN


FIRST VERSION.


THERE was once an old fox with nine tails, who wished to put his wife's
affection to proof, pretended to be dead, and stretched himself under
the bench quite stiff, and never moved a joint, on which Mrs. Fox
retired to her room and locked herself in, while her maid, the cat,
stayed by the kitchen fire and attended to the cooking.

When it became known that the old fox was dead, some suitors prepared to
come forward, and presently the maid heard some one knocking at the
house door; she went and opened it, and there was a young fox, who said,

    "What is she doing, Miss Cat?
    Is she sleeping, or waking, or what is she at?"

And the cat answered,

    "I am not asleep, I am quite wide awake,
    Perhaps you would know what I'm going to make;
    I'm melting some butter, and warming some beer,
    Will it please you sit down, and partake of my cheer?"

"Thank you, miss," said the fox. "What is Mrs. Fox doing?"

The maid answered,

    "She is sitting upstairs in her grief,
      And her eyes with her weeping are sore;
    From her sorrow she gets no relief,
      Now poor old Mr. Fox is no more!"

"But just tell her, miss, that a young fox has come to woo her."

"Very well, young master," answered the cat.

Up went the cat pit-a-pat, pit-a-pat.

She knocks at the door, rat-a-tat, rat-a-tat!

    "Mrs. Fox, are you there?"
    "Yes, yes, pussy dear!"
    "There's a suitor below,
    Shall I tell him to go?"

"But what is he like?" asked Mrs. Fox. "Has he nine beautiful tails,
like dear Mr. Fox?"

"Oh no," answered the cat; "he has only one."

"Then I won't have him," said Mrs. Fox.

So the cat went down-stairs, and sent the suitor away. Soon there was
another knock at the door. It was another fox come to woo. He had two
tails, but he met with no better success than the first. Then there
arrived more foxes, one after another, each with one more tail than the
last, but they were all dismissed, until there came one with nine tails
like old Mr. Fox. When the widow heard that she cried, full of joy, to
the cat,

    "Now, open door and window wide,
    And turn old Mr. Fox outside."

But before they could do so, up jumped old Mr. Fox from under the bench,
and cudgelled the whole pack, driving them, with Mrs. Fox, out of the
house.


SECOND VERSION.


WHEN old Mr. Fox died there came a wolf to woo, and he knocked at the
door, and the cat opened to him; and he made her a bow, and said,

    "Good day, Miss Cat, so brisk and gay,
    How is it that alone you stay?
    And what is it you cook to-day?"

The cat answered,

    "Bread so white, and milk so sweet,
    Will it please you sit and eat?"

"Thank you very much, Miss Cat," answered the wolf; "but is Mrs. Fox at
home?"

Then the cat said,

    "She is sitting upstairs in her grief,
      And her eyes with her weeping are sore,
    From her sorrow she gets no relief,
      Now poor old Mr. Fox is no more!"

The wolf answered,

    "Won't she take another spouse,
    To protect her and her house?"

Up went the cat, pit-a-pat, pit-a-pat.

She knocks at the door, rat-a-tat, rat-a-tat!

    "Mrs. Fox, are you there?"
    "Yes, yes, pussy dear!"
    "There's a suitor below,
    Shall I tell him to go?"

But Mrs. Fox asked, "Has the gentleman red breeches and a sharp nose?"

"No," answered the cat.

"Then I won't have him," said Mrs. Fox.

After the wolf was sent away, there came a dog, a stag, a hare, a bear,
a lion, and several other wild animals. But they all of them lacked the
good endowments possessed by the late Mr. Fox, so that the cat had to
send them all away. At last came a young fox. And Mrs. Fox inquired
whether he had red breeches and a sharp nose.

"Yes, he has," said the cat.

"Then I will have him," said Mrs. Fox, and bade the cat make ready the
wedding-feast.

    "Now, cat, sweep the parlours and bustle about,
    And open the window, turn Mr. Fox out;
    Then, if you've a fancy for anything nice,
    Just manage to catch for yourself a few mice,
    You may eat them alone,
    I do not want one."

So she was married to young Master Fox with much dancing and rejoicing,
and for anything I have heard to the contrary, they may be dancing
still.




THE ELVES

(I)


THERE was once a shoemaker, who, through no fault of his own, became so
poor that at last he had nothing left but just enough leather to make
one pair of shoes. He cut out the shoes at night, so as to set to work
upon them next morning; and as he had a good conscience, he laid himself
quietly down in his bed, committed himself to heaven, and fell asleep.
In the morning, after he had said his prayers, and was going to get to
work, he found the pair of shoes made and finished, and standing on his
table. He was very much astonished, and could not tell what to think,
and he took the shoes in his hand to examine them more nearly; and they
were so well made that every stitch was in its right place, just as if
they had come from the hand of a master-workman.

Soon after a purchaser entered, and as the shoes fitted him very well,
he gave more than the usual price for them, so that the shoemaker had
enough money to buy leather for two more pairs of shoes. He cut them out
at night, and intended to set to work the next morning with fresh
spirit; but that was not to be, for when he got up they were already
finished, and a customer even was not lacking, who gave him so much
money that he was able to buy leather enough for four new pairs. Early
next morning he found the four pairs also finished, and so it always
happened; whatever he cut out in the evening was worked up by the
morning, so that he was soon in the way of making a good living, and in
the end became very well to do.

One night, not long before Christmas, when the shoemaker had finished
cutting out, and before he went to bed, he said to his wife,

"How would it be if we were to sit up to-night and see who it is that
does us this service?"

His wife agreed, and set a light to burn. Then they both hid in a corner
of the room, behind some coats that were hanging up, and then they began
to watch. As soon as it was midnight they saw come in two neatly-formed
naked little men, who seated themselves before the shoemaker's table,
and took up the work that was already prepared, and began to stitch, to
pierce, and to hammer so cleverly and quickly with their little fingers
that the shoemaker's eyes could scarcely follow them, so full of wonder
was he. And they never left off until everything was finished and was
standing ready on the table, and then they jumped up and ran off.

The next morning the shoemaker's wife said to her husband, "Those little
men have made us rich, and we ought to show ourselves grateful. With all
their running about, and having nothing to cover them, they must be very
cold. I'll tell you what; I will make little shirts, coats, waistcoats,
and breeches for them, and knit each of them a pair of stockings, and
you shall make each of them a pair of shoes."

The husband consented willingly, and at night, when everything was
finished, they laid the gifts together on the table, instead of the
cut-out work, and placed themselves so that they could observe how the
little men would behave. When midnight came, they rushed in, ready to
set to work, but when they found, instead of the pieces of prepared
leather, the neat little garments put ready for them, they stood a
moment in surprise, and then they testified the greatest delight. With
the greatest swiftness they took up the pretty garments and slipped them
on, singing,

    "What spruce and dandy boys are we!
    No longer cobblers we will be."

Then they hopped and danced about, jumping over the chairs and tables,
and at last they danced out at the door.

From that time they were never seen again; but it always went well with
the shoemaker as long as he lived, and whatever he took in hand
prospered.


(II.)


THERE was once a poor servant maid, who was very cleanly and
industrious; she swept down the house every day, and put the sweepings
on a great heap by the door. One morning, before she began her work, she
found a letter, and as she could not read, she laid her broom in the
corner, and took the letter to her master and mistress, to see what it
was about; and it was an invitation from the elves, who wished the maid
to come and stand godmother to one of their children. The maid did not
know what to do; and as she was told that no one ought to refuse the
elves anything, she made up her mind to go. So there came three little
elves, who conducted her into the middle of a high mountain, where the
little people lived. Here everything was of a very small size, but more
fine and elegant than can be told. The mother of the child lay in a bed
made of ebony, studded with pearls, the counterpane was embroidered with
gold, the cradle was of ivory, and the bathing-tub of gold. So the maid
stood godmother, and was then for going home, but the elves begged her
to stay at least three more days with them; and so she consented, and
spent the time in mirth and jollity, and the elves seemed very fond of
her. At last, when she was ready to go away, they filled her pockets
full of gold, and led her back again out of the mountain. When she got
back to the house, she was going to begin working again, and took her
broom in her hand; it was still standing in the corner where she had
left it, and began to sweep. Then came up some strangers and asked her
who she was, and what she was doing. And she found that instead of three
days, she had been seven years with the elves in the mountain, and that
during that time her master and mistress had died.


(III.)


The elves once took a child away from its mother, and left in its place
a changeling with a big head and staring eyes, who did nothing but eat
and drink. The mother in her trouble went to her neighbours and asked
their advice. The neighbours told her to take the changeling into the
kitchen and put it near the hearth, and then to make up the fire, and
boil water in two egg-shells; that would make the changeling laugh, and
if he laughed, it would be all over with him. So the woman did as her
neighbours advised. And when she set the egg-shells of water on the
fire, the changeling said,

    "Though old I be
    As forest tree,
    Cooking in an egg-shell never did I see!"

and began to laugh. And directly there came in a crowd of elves bringing
in the right child; and they laid it near the hearth, and carried the
changeling away with them.




[Illustration: THE ROBBER BRIDEGROOM

    "TURN BACK, TURN BACK, THOU PRETTY BRIDE,
    WITHIN THIS HOUSE THOU MUST NOT BIDE,
    FOR HERE DO EVIL THINGS BETIDE."]




THE ROBBER BRIDEGROOM


THERE was once a miller who had a beautiful daughter, and when she was
grown up he became anxious that she should be well married and taken
care of; so he thought,

"If a decent sort of man comes and asks her in marriage, I will give her
to him."

Soon after a suitor came forward who seemed very well to do, and as the
miller knew nothing to his disadvantage, he promised him his daughter.
But the girl did not seem to love him as a bride should love her
bridegroom; she had no confidence in him; as often as she saw him or
thought about him, she felt a chill at her heart. One day he said to
her,

"You are to be my bride, and yet you have never been to see me."

The girl answered,

"I do not know where your house is."

Then he said,

"My house is a long way in the wood."

She began to make excuses, and said she could not find the way to it;
but the bridegroom said,

"You must come and pay me a visit next Sunday; I have already invited
company, and I will strew ashes on the path through the wood, so that
you will be sure to find it."

When Sunday came, and the girl set out on her way, she felt very uneasy
without knowing exactly why; and she filled both pockets full of peas
and lentils. There were ashes strewed on the path through the wood,
but, nevertheless, at each step she cast to the right and left a few
peas on the ground. So she went on the whole day until she came to the
middle of the wood, where it was the darkest, and there stood a lonely
house, not pleasant in her eyes, for it was dismal and unhomelike. She
walked in, but there was no one there, and the greatest stillness
reigned. Suddenly she heard a voice cry,

    "Turn back, turn back, thou pretty bride,
    Within this house thou must not bide,
    For here do evil things betide."

The girl glanced round, and perceived that the voice came from a bird
who was hanging in a cage by the wall. And again it cried,

    "Turn back, turn back, thou pretty bride,
    Within this house thou must not bide,
    For here do evil things betide."

Then the pretty bride went on from one room into another through the
whole house, but it was quite empty, and no soul to be found in it.

At last she reached the cellar, and there sat a very old woman nodding
her head.

"Can you tell me," said the bride, "if my bridegroom lives here?"

"Oh, poor child," answered the old woman, "do you know what has happened
to you? You are in a place of cut-throats. You thought you were a bride,
and soon to be married, but death will be your spouse. Look here, I have
a great kettle of water to set on, and when once they have you in their
power they will cut you in pieces without mercy, cook you, and eat you,
for they are cannibals. Unless I have pity on you, and save you, all is
over with you!"

Then the old woman hid her behind a great cask, where she could not be
seen.

"Be as still as a mouse," said she; "do not move or go away, or else you
are lost. At night, when the robbers are asleep, we will escape. I have
been waiting a long time for an opportunity."

No sooner was it settled than the wicked gang entered the house. They
brought another young woman with them, dragging her along, and they
were drunk, and would not listen to her cries and groans. They gave her
wine to drink, three glasses full, one of white wine, one of red, and
one of yellow, and then they cut her in pieces. The poor bride all the
while shaking and trembling when she saw what a fate the robbers had
intended for her. One of them noticed on the little finger of their
victim a golden ring, and as he could not draw it off easily, he took an
axe and chopped it off, but the finger jumped away, and fell behind the
cask on the bride's lap. The robber took up a light to look for it, but
he could not find it. Then said one of the others,

"Have you looked behind the great cask?"

But the old woman cried,

"Come to supper, and leave off looking till to-morrow; the finger cannot
run away."

Then the robbers said the old woman was right, and they left off
searching, and sat down to eat, and the old woman dropped some sleeping
stuff into their wine, so that before long they stretched themselves on
the cellar floor, sleeping and snoring. When the bride heard that, she
came from behind the cask, and had to make her way among the sleepers
lying all about on the ground, and she felt very much afraid lest she
might awaken any of them. But by good luck she passed through, and the
old woman with her, and they opened the door, and they made all haste to
leave that house of murderers. The wind had carried away the ashes from
the path, but the peas and lentils had budded and sprung up, and the
moonshine upon them showed the way. And they went on through the night,
till in the morning they reached the mill. Then the girl related to her
father all that had happened to her.

When the wedding-day came, the friends and neighbours assembled, the
miller having invited them, and the bridegroom also appeared. When they
were all seated at table, each one had to tell a story. But the bride
sat still, and said nothing, till at last the bridegroom said to her,

"Now, sweetheart, do you know no story? Tell us something."

She answered,

"I will tell you my dream. I was going alone through a wood, and I came
at last to a house in which there was no living soul, but by the wall
was a bird in a cage, who cried,

    'Turn back, turn back, thou pretty bride,
    Within this house thou must not bide,
    For evil things do here betide.'

"And then again it said it. Sweetheart, the dream is not ended. Then I
went through all the rooms, and they were all empty, and it was so
lonely and wretched. At last I went down into the cellar, and there sat
an old old woman, nodding her head. I asked her if my bridegroom lived
in that house, and she answered, 'Ah, poor child, you have come into a
place of cut-throats; your bridegroom does live here, but he will kill
you and cut you in pieces, and then cook and eat you.' Sweetheart, the
dream is not ended. But the old woman hid me behind a great cask, and no
sooner had she done so than the robbers came home, dragging with them a
young woman, and they gave her to drink wine thrice, white, red, and
yellow. Sweetheart, the dream is not yet ended. And then they killed
her, and cut her in pieces. Sweetheart, my dream is not yet ended. And
one of the robbers saw a gold ring on the finger of the young woman, and
as it was difficult to get off, he took an axe and chopped off the
finger, which jumped upwards, and then fell behind the great cask on my
lap. And here is the finger with the ring!"

At these words she drew it forth, and showed it to the company.

The robber, who during the story had grown deadly white, sprang up, and
would have escaped, but the folks held him fast, and delivered him up to
justice. And he and his whole gang were, for their evil deeds, condemned
and executed.




MR KORBES


A COCK and a hen once wanted to go a journey together. So the cock built
a beautiful carriage with four red wheels, and he harnessed four little
mice to it. And the cock and the hen got into it, and were driven off.
Very soon they met a cat, who asked where they were going. The cock
answered,

    "On Mr. Korbes a call to pay,
    And that is where we go to-day!"

"Take me with you," said the cat.

The cock answered,

"Very well, only you must sit well back, and then you will not fall
forward."

    "And pray take care
    Of my red wheels there;
    And wheels be steady,
    And mice be ready
    On Mr. Korbes a call to pay,
    For that is where we go to-day!"

Then there came up a millstone, then an egg, then a duck, then a pin,
and lastly a needle, who all got up on the carriage, and were driven
along. But when they came to Mr. Korbes's house he was not at home. So
the mice drew the carriage into the barn, the cock and the hen flew up
and perched on a beam, the cat sat by the fireside, the duck settled on
the water; but the egg wrapped itself in the towel, the pin stuck itself
in the chair cushion, the needle jumped into the bed among the pillows,
and the millstone laid itself by the door. Then Mr. Korbes came home,
and went to the hearth to make a fire, but the cat threw ashes in his
eyes. Then he ran quickly into the kitchen to wash himself, but the duck
splashed water in his face. Then he was going to wipe it with the towel,
but the egg broke in it, and stuck his eyelids together. In order to get
a little peace he sat down in his chair, but the pin ran into him, and,
starting up, in his vexation he threw himself on the bed, but as his
head fell on the pillow, in went the needle, so that he called out with
the pain, and madly rushed out. But when he reached the housedoor the
mill-stone jumped up and struck him dead.

What a bad man Mr. Korbes must have been!




TOM THUMB'S TRAVELS


THERE was once a tailor who had a son no higher than a thumb, so he was
called Tom Thumb. Notwithstanding his small size, he had plenty of
spirit, and one day he said to his father,

"Father, go out into the world I must and will."

"Very well, my son," said the old man, and taking a long darning needle,
he put a knob of sealing-wax on the end, saying,

"Here is a sword to take with you on your journey."

Now the little tailor wanted to have one more meal first, and so he
trotted into the kitchen to see what sort of a farewell feast his mother
had cooked for him. It was all ready, and the dish was standing on the
hearth. Then said he,

"Mother, what is the fare to-day?"

"You can see for yourself," said the mother. Then Tom Thumb ran to the
hearth and peeped into the dish, but as he stretched his neck too far
over it, the steam caught him and carried him up the chimney. For a time
he floated with the steam about in the air, but at last he sank down to
the ground. Then the little tailor found himself out in the wide world,
and he wandered about, and finally engaged himself to a master tailor,
but the food was not good enough for him.

"Mistress," said Tom Thumb, "if you do not give us better victuals, I
shall go out early in the morning and write with a piece of chalk on the
house-door, 'Plenty of potatoes to eat, and but little meat; so
good-bye, Mr. Potato.'"

"What are you after, grasshopper?" said the mistress, and growing angry
she seized a piece of rag to beat him off; but he crept underneath her
thimble, and then peeped at her, and put his tongue out at her. She took
up the thimble, and would have seized him, but he hopped among the rags,
and as the mistress turned them over to find him, he stepped into a
crack in the table. "He-hee! Mistress!" cried he, sticking out his head,
and when she was just going to grasp him, he jumped into the
table-drawer. But in the end she caught him, and drove him out of the
house.

So he wandered on until he came to a great wood; and there he met a gang
of robbers that were going to rob the king's treasury. When they saw the
little tailor, they thought to themselves,

"Such a little fellow might easily creep through a key-hole, and serve
instead of a pick-lock."

"Holloa!" cried one, "you giant Goliath, will you come with us to the
treasure-chamber? you can slip in, and then throw us out the money."

Tom Thumb considered a little, but at last he consented and went with
them to the treasure-chamber. Then he looked all over the doors above
and below, but there was no crack to be seen; at last he found one broad
enough to let him pass, and he was getting through, when one of the
sentinels that stood before the door saw him, and said to the other,

"See what an ugly spider is crawling there! I will put an end to him."

"Let the poor creature alone," said the other, "it has done you no
harm."

So Tom Thumb got safely through the crack into the treasure-chamber, and
he opened the window beneath which the thieves were standing, and he
threw them out one dollar after another. Just as he had well settled to
the work, he heard the king coming to take a look at his treasure, and
so Tom Thumb had to creep away. The king presently remarked that many
good dollars were wanting, but could not imagine how they could have
been stolen, as the locks and bolts were in good order, and everything
seemed secure. And he went away, saying to the two sentinels,

"Keep good guard; there is some one after the money."

When Tom Thumb had set to work anew, they heard the chink, chink of the
money, and hastily rushed in to catch the thief. But the little tailor,
as he heard them coming, was too quick for them, and, hiding in a
corner, he covered himself up with a dollar, so that nothing of him was
to be seen, and then he mocked the sentinels, crying, "Here I am!" They
ran about, and when they came near him, he was soon in another corner
under a dollar, crying, "Here I am!" Then the sentinels ran towards him,
and in a moment he was in a third corner, crying, "Here I am!" In this
way he made fools of them, and dodged them so long about the
treasure-chamber, that they got tired and went away. Then he set to
work, and threw the dollars out of the window, one after the other, till
they were all gone; and when it came to the last, as he flung it with
all his might, he jumped nimbly on it, and flew with it out of the
window. The robbers gave him great praise, saying,

"You are a most valiant hero; will you be our captain?"

But Tom Thumb thanked them, and said he would like to see the world
first. Then they divided the spoil; but the little tailor's share was
only one farthing, which was all he was able to carry.

Then binding his sword to his side, he bid the robbers good day, and
started on his way. He applied to several master tailors, but they would
not have anything to do with him; and at last he hired himself as indoor
servant at an inn. The maid servants took a great dislike to him, for he
used to see everything they did without being seen by them, and he told
the master and mistress about what they took from the plates, and what
they carried away out of the cellar. And they said, "Wait a little, we
will pay you out," and took counsel together to play him some
mischievous trick. Once when one of the maids was mowing the grass in
the garden she saw Tom Thumb jumping about and creeping among the
cabbages, and she mowed him with the grass, tied all together in a
bundle, and threw it to the cows. Among the cows was a big black one,
who swallowed him down, without doing him any harm. But he did not like
his lodging, it was so dark, and there was no candle to be had. When the
cow was being milked, he cried out,

    "Strip, strap, strull,
    Will the pail soon be full?"

But he was not understood because of the noise of the milk. Presently
the landlord came into the stable and said,

"To-morrow this cow is to be slaughtered."

At that Tom Thumb felt very terrified; and with his shrillest voice he
cried,

"Let me out first; I am sitting inside here!"

The master heard him quite plainly, but could not tell where the voice
came from.

"Where are you?" asked he.

"Inside the black one," answered Tom Thumb, but the master, not
understanding the meaning of it all, went away.

The next morning the cow was slaughtered. Happily, in all the cutting
and slashing he escaped all harm, and he slipped among the sausage-meat.
When the butcher came near to set to work, he cried with all his might,

"Don't cut so deep, don't cut so deep, I am underneath!"

But for the sound of the butcher's knife his voice was not heard. Now,
poor Tom Thumb was in great straits, and he had to jump nimbly out of
the way of the knife, and finally he came through with a whole skin. But
he could not get quite away, and he had to let himself remain with the
lumps of fat to be put in a black pudding. His quarters were rather
narrow, and he had to be hung up in the chimney in the smoke, and to
remain there a very long while. At last, when winter came he was taken
down, for the black pudding was to be set before a guest. And when the
landlady cut the black pudding in slices, he had to take great care not
to lift up his head too much, or it might be shaved off at the neck. At
last he saw his opportunity, took courage, and jumped out.

But as things had gone so badly with him in that house, Tom Thumb did
not mean to stay there, but betook himself again to his wanderings. His
freedom, however, did not last long. In the open fields there came a fox
who snapped him up without thinking.

"Oh, Mr. Fox," cries Tom Thumb, "here I am sticking in your throat; let
me out again."

"Very well," answered the fox. "It is true you are no better than
nothing; promise me the hens in your father's yard, then I will let you
go."

"With all my heart," answered Tom Thumb, "you shall have them all, I
promise you."

Then the fox let him go, and he ran home. When the father saw his dear
little son again, he gave the fox willingly all the hens that he had.

"And look, besides, what a fine piece of money I've got for you!" said
Tom Thumb, and handed over the farthing which he had earned in his
wanderings.

But how, you ask, could they let the fox devour all the poor chicks?

Why, you silly child, you know that your father would rather have you
than the hens in his yard!




THE ALMOND TREE


A LONG time ago, perhaps as much as two thousand years, there was a rich
man, and he had a beautiful and pious wife, and they loved each other
very much, and they had no children, though they wished greatly for
some, and the wife prayed for one day and night. Now, in the courtyard
in front of their house stood an almond tree; and one day in winter the
wife was standing beneath it, and paring an apple, and as she pared it
she cut her finger, and the blood fell upon the snow.

"Ah," said the woman, sighing deeply, and looking down at the blood, "if
only I could have a child as red as blood, and as white as snow!"

[Illustration: THE ALMOND TREE

    "KYWITT, KYWITT, KYWITT, I CRY,
    OH WHAT A BEAUTIFUL BIRD AM I!"]

And as she said these words, her heart suddenly grew light, and she felt
sure she should have her wish. So she went back to the house, and when a
month had passed the snow was gone; in two months everything was green;
in three months the flowers sprang out of the earth; in four months the
trees were in full leaf, and the branches were thickly entwined; the
little birds began to sing, so that the woods echoed, and the blossoms
fell from the trees; when the fifth month had passed the wife stood
under the almond tree, and it smelt so sweet that her heart leaped
within her, and she fell on her knees for joy; and when the sixth month
had gone, the fruit was thick and fine, and she remained still; and the
seventh month she gathered the almonds, and ate them eagerly, and was
sick and sorrowful; and when the eighth month had passed she called
to her husband, and said, weeping,

"If I die, bury me under the almond tree."

Then she was comforted and happy until the ninth month had passed, and
then she bore a child as white as snow and as red as blood, and when she
saw it her joy was so great that she died.

Her husband buried her under the almond tree, and he wept sore; time
passed, and he became less sad; and after he had grieved a little more
he left off, and then he took another wife.

His second wife bore him a daughter, and his first wife's child was a
son, as red as blood and as white as snow. Whenever the wife looked at
her daughter she felt great love for her, but whenever she looked at the
little boy, evil thoughts came into her heart, of how she could get all
her husband's money for her daughter, and how the boy stood in the way;
and so she took great hatred to him, and drove him from one corner to
another, and gave him a buffet here and a cuff there, so that the poor
child was always in disgrace; when he came back after school hours there
was no peace for him.

Once, when the wife went into the room upstairs, her little daughter
followed her, and said,

"Mother, give me an apple."

"Yes, my child," said the mother, and gave her a fine apple out of the
chest, and the chest had a great heavy lid with a strong iron lock.

"Mother," said the little girl, "shall not my brother have one too?"

That was what the mother expected, and she said,

"Yes, when he comes back from school."

And when she saw from the window that he was coming, an evil thought
crossed her mind, and she snatched the apple, and took it from her
little daughter, saying,

"You shall not have it before your brother."

Then she threw the apple into the chest, and shut to the lid. Then the
little boy came in at the door, and she said to him in a kind tone, but
with evil looks,

"My son, will you have an apple?"

"Mother," said the boy, "how terrible you look! yes, give me an apple!"

Then she spoke as kindly as before, holding up the cover of the chest,

"Come here and take out one for yourself."

And as the boy was stooping over the open chest, crash went the lid
down, so that his head flew off among the red apples. But then the woman
felt great terror, and wondered how she could escape the blame. And she
went to the chest of drawers in her bedroom and took a white
handkerchief out of the nearest drawer, and fitting the head to the
neck, she bound them with the handkerchief, so that nothing should be
seen, and set him on a chair before the door with the apple in his hand.

Then came little Marjory into the kitchen to her mother, who was
standing before the fire stirring a pot of hot water.

"Mother," said Marjory, "my brother is sitting before the door and he
has an apple in his hand, and looks very pale; I asked him to give me
the apple, but he did not answer me; it seems very strange."

"Go again to him," said the mother, "and if he will not answer you, give
him a box on the ear."

So Marjory went again and said,

"Brother, give me the apple."

But as he took no notice, she gave him a box on the ear, and his head
fell off, at which she was greatly terrified, and began to cry and
scream, and ran to her mother, and said,

"O mother! I have knocked my brother's head off!" and cried and
screamed, and would not cease.

"O Marjory!" said her mother, "what have you done? but keep quiet, that
no one may see there is anything the matter; it can't be helped now; we
will put him out of the way safely."

When the father came home and sat down to table, he said,

"Where is my son?"

But the mother was filling a great dish full of black broth, and Marjory
was crying bitterly, for she could not refrain. Then the father said
again,

"Where is my son?"

"Oh," said the mother, "he is gone into the country to his great-uncle's
to stay for a little while."

"What should he go for?" said the father, "and without bidding me
good-bye, too!"

"Oh, he wanted to go so much, and he asked me to let him stay there six
weeks; he will be well taken care of."

"Dear me," said the father, "I am quite sad about it; it was not right
of him to go without bidding me good-bye."

With that he began to eat, saying,

"Marjory, what are you crying for? Your brother will come back some
time."

After a while he said,

"Well, wife, the food is very good; give me some more."

And the more he ate the more he wanted, until he had eaten it all up,
and he threw the bones under the table. Then Marjory went to her chest
of drawers, and took one of her best handkerchiefs from the bottom
drawer, and picked up all the bones from under the table and tied them
up in her handkerchief, and went out at the door crying bitterly. She
laid them in the green grass under the almond tree, and immediately her
heart grew light again, and she wept no more. Then the almond tree began
to wave to and fro, and the boughs drew together and then parted, just
like a clapping of hands for joy; then a cloud rose from the tree, and
in the midst of the cloud there burned a fire, and out of the fire a
beautiful bird arose, and, singing most sweetly, soared high into the
air; and when he had flown away, the almond tree remained as it was
before, but the handkerchief full of bones was gone. Marjory felt quite
glad and light-hearted, just as if her brother were still alive. So she
went back merrily into the house and had her dinner.

The bird, when it flew away, perched on the roof of a goldsmith's house,
and began to sing,

    "It was my mother who murdered me;
    It was my father who ate of me;
    It was my sister Marjory
    Who all my bones in pieces found;
    Them in a handkerchief she bound,
    And laid them under the almond tree.
    Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry,
    Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"

The goldsmith was sitting in his shop making a golden chain, and when he
heard the bird, who was sitting on his roof and singing, he started up
to go and look, and as he passed over his threshold he lost one of his
slippers; and he went into the middle of the street with a slipper on
one foot and only a sock on the other; with his apron on, and the gold
chain in one hand and the pincers in the other; and so he stood in the
sunshine looking up at the bird.

"Bird," said he, "how beautifully you sing; do sing that piece over
again."

"No," said the bird, "I do not sing for nothing twice; if you will give
me that gold chain I will sing again."

"Very well," said the goldsmith, "here is the gold chain; now do as you
said."

Down came the bird and took the gold chain in his right claw, perched in
front of the goldsmith, and sang,

    "It was my mother who murdered me;
    It was my father who ate of me;
    It was my sister Marjory
    Who all my bones in pieces found;
    Them in a handkerchief she bound,
    And laid them under the almond tree.
    Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry,
    Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"

Then the bird flew to a shoemaker's, and perched on his roof, and sang,

    "It was my mother who murdered me;
    It was my father who ate of me;
    It was my sister Marjory
    Who all my bones in pieces found;
    Them in a handkerchief she bound,
    And laid them under the almond tree.
    Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry,
    Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"

When the shoemaker heard, he ran out of his door in his shirt sleeves
and looked up at the roof of his house, holding his hand to shade his
eyes from the sun.

"Bird," said he, "how beautifully you sing!"

Then he called in at his door,

"Wife, come out directly; here is a bird singing beautifully; only
listen."

Then he called his daughter, all his children, and acquaintance, both
young men and maidens, and they came up the street and gazed on the
bird, and saw how beautiful it was with red and green feathers, and
round its throat was as it were gold, and its eyes twinkled in its head
like stars.

"Bird," said the shoemaker, "do sing that piece over again."

"No," said the bird, "I may not sing for nothing twice; you must give me
something."

"Wife," said the man, "go into the shop; on the top shelf stands a pair
of red shoes; bring them here."

So the wife went and brought the shoes.

"Now bird," said the man, "sing us that piece again."

And the bird came down and took the shoes in his left claw, and flew up
again to the roof, and sang,

    "It was my mother who murdered me;
    It was my father who ate of me;
    It was my sister Marjory
    Who all my bones in pieces found;
    Them in a handkerchief she bound,
    And laid them under the almond tree.
    Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry,
    Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"

And when he had finished he flew away, with the chain in his right claw
and the shoes in his left claw, and he flew till he reached a mill, and
the mill went "clip-clap, clip-clap, clip-clap." And in the mill sat
twenty millers-men hewing a millstone--"hick-hack, hick-hack,
hick-hack," while the mill was going "clip-clap, clip-clap, clip-clap."
And the bird perched on a linden tree that stood in front of the mill,
and sang,

    "It was my mother who murdered me;"

Here one of the men looked up.

    "It was my father who ate of me;"

Then two more looked up and listened.

    "It was my sister Marjory"

Here four more looked up.

    "Who all my bones in pieces found;
    Them in a handkerchief she bound,"

Now there were only eight left hewing.

    "And laid them under the almond tree."

Now only five.

    "Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry,"

Now only one.

    "Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"

At length the last one left off, and he only heard the end.

"Bird," said he, "how beautifully you sing; let me hear it all; sing
that again!"

"No," said the bird, "I may not sing it twice for nothing; if you will
give me the millstone I will sing it again."

"Indeed," said the man, "if it belonged to me alone you should have it."

"All right," said the others, "if he sings again he shall have it."

Then the bird came down, and all the twenty millers heaved up the stone
with poles--"yo! heave-ho! yo! heave-ho!" and the bird stuck his head
through the hole in the middle, and with the millstone round his neck he
flew up to the tree and sang,

    "It was my mother who murdered me;
    It was my father who ate of me;
    It was my sister Marjory
    Who all my bones in pieces found;
    Them in a handkerchief she bound,
    And laid them under the almond tree.
    Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry,
    Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"

And when he had finished, he spread his wings, having in the right claw
the chain, and in the left claw the shoes, and round his neck the
millstone, and he flew away to his father's house.

In the parlour sat the father, the mother, and Marjory at the table; the
father said,

"How light-hearted and cheerful I feel."

"Nay," said the mother, "I feel very low, just as if a great storm were
coming."

But Marjory sat weeping; and the bird came flying, and perched on the
roof.

"Oh," said the father, "I feel so joyful, and the sun is shining so
bright; it is as if I were going to meet with an old friend."

"Nay," said the wife, "I am terrified, my teeth chatter, and there is
fire in my veins," and she tore open her dress to get air; and Marjory
sat in a corner and wept, with her plate before her, until it was quite
full of tears. Then the bird perched on the almond tree, and sang,

    "It was my mother who murdered me;"

And the mother stopped her ears and hid her eyes, and would neither see
nor hear; nevertheless, the noise of a fearful storm was in her ears,
and in her eyes a quivering and burning as of lightning.

    "It was my father who ate of me;"

"O mother!" said the father, "there is a beautiful bird singing so
finely, and the sun shines, and everything smells as sweet as cinnamon.

    "It was my sister Marjory"

Marjory hid her face in her lap and wept, and the father said,

"I must go out to see the bird."

"Oh do not go!" said the wife, "I feel as if the house were on fire."

But the man went out and looked at the bird.

    "Who all my bones in pieces found;
    Them in a handkerchief she bound,
    And laid them under the almond tree.
    Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry,
    Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"

With that the bird let fall the gold chain upon his father's neck, and
it fitted him exactly. So he went indoors and said,

"Look what a beautiful chain the bird has given me."

Then his wife was so terrified that she fell all along on the floor, and
her cap came off. Then the bird began again to sing,

    "It was my mother who murdered me;"

"Oh," groaned the mother, "that I were a thousand fathoms under ground,
so as not to be obliged to hear it."

    "It was my father who ate of me;"

Then the woman lay as if she were dead.

    "It was my sister Marjory"

"Oh," said Marjory, "I will go out, too, and see if the bird will give
me anything." And so she went.

    "Who all my bones in pieces found;
    Them in a handkerchief she bound,"

Then he threw the shoes down to her.

    "And laid them under the almond tree.
    Kywitt, kywitt, kywitt, I cry,
    Oh what a beautiful bird am I!"

And poor Marjory all at once felt happy and joyful, and put on her red
shoes, and danced and jumped for joy.

"Oh dear," said she, "I felt so sad before I went outside, and now my
heart is so light! He is a charming bird to have given me a pair of red
shoes."

But the mother's hair stood on end, and looked like flame, and she said,

"Even if the world is coming to an end, I must go out for a little
relief."

Just as she came outside the door, crash went the millstone on her head,
and crushed her flat. The father and daughter rushed out, and saw smoke
and flames of fire rise up; but when that had gone by, there stood the
little brother; and he took his father and Marjory by the hand, and they
felt very happy and content, and went indoors, and sat to the table, and
had their dinner.




OLD SULTAN


THERE was once a peasant who owned a faithful dog called Sultan, now
grown so old that he had lost all his teeth, and could lay hold of
nothing. One day the man was standing at the door of his house with his
wife, and he said,

"I shall kill old Sultan to-morrow; he is of no good any longer."

His wife felt sorry for the poor dog, and answered, "He has served us
for so many years, and has kept with us so faithfully, he deserves food
and shelter in his old age."

"Dear me, you do not seem to understand the matter," said the husband;
"he has never a tooth, and no thief would mind him in the least, so I do
not see why he should not be made away with. If he has served us well,
we have given him plenty of good food."

The poor dog, who was lying stretched out in the sun not far off, heard
all they said, and was very sad to think that the next day would be his
last. He bethought him of his great friend the wolf, and slipped out in
the evening to the wood to see him, and related to him the fate that was
awaiting him.

"Listen to me, old fellow," said the wolf; "be of good courage, I will
help you in your need. I have thought of a way. Early to-morrow morning
your master is going hay-making with his wife, and they will take their
child with them, so that no one will be left at home. They will be sure
to lay the child in the shade behind the hedge while they are at work;
you must lie by its side, just as if you were watching it. Then I will
come out of the wood and steal away the child; you must rush after me,
as if to save it from me. Then I must let it fall, and you must bring it
back again to its parents, who will think that you have saved it, and
will be much too grateful to do you any harm; on the contrary, you will
be received into full favour, and they will never let you want for
anything again."

The dog was pleased with the plan, which was carried out accordingly.
When the father saw the wolf running away with his child he cried out,
and when old Sultan brought it back again, he was much pleased with him,
and patted him, saying,

"Not a hair of him shall be touched; he shall have food and shelter as
long as he lives." And he said to his wife,

"Go home directly and make some good stew for old Sultan, something that
does not need biting; and get the pillow from my bed for him to lie on."

From that time old Sultan was made so comfortable that he had nothing
left to wish for. Before long the wolf paid him a visit, to congratulate
him that all had gone so well.

"But, old fellow," said he, "you must wink at my making off by chance
with a fat sheep of your master's; perhaps one will escape some fine
day."

"Don't reckon on that," answered the dog; "I cannot consent to it; I
must remain true to my master."

But the wolf, not supposing it was said in earnest, came sneaking in the
night to carry off the sheep. But the master, who had been warned by the
faithful Sultan of the wolf's intention, was waiting for him, and gave
him a fine hiding with the threshing-flail. So the wolf had to make his
escape, calling out to the dog,

"You shall pay for this, you traitor!"

The next morning the wolf sent the wild boar to call out the dog; and to
appoint a meeting in the wood to receive satisfaction from him. Old
Sultan could find no second but a cat with three legs; and as they set
off together, the poor thing went limping along, holding her tail up in
the air. The wolf and his second were already on the spot; when they saw
their antagonists coming, and caught sight of the elevated tail of the
cat, they thought it was a sabre they were bringing with them. And as
the poor thing came limping on three legs, they supposed it was lifting
a big stone to throw at them. This frightened them very much; the wild
boar crept among the leaves, and the wolf clambered up into a tree. And
when the dog and cat came up, they were surprised not to see any one
there. However, the wild boar was not perfectly hidden in the leaves,
and the tips of his ears peeped out. And when the cat caught sight of
one, she thought it was a mouse, and sprang upon it, seizing it with her
teeth. Out leaped the wild boar with a dreadful cry, and ran away
shouting,

"There is the culprit in the tree!"

And the dog and the cat looking up caught sight of the wolf, who came
down, quite ashamed of his timidity, and made peace with the dog once
more.




THE SIX SWANS


ONCE on a time a king was hunting in a great wood, and he pursued a wild
animal so eagerly that none of his people could follow him. When evening
came he stood still, and looking round him he found that he had lost his
way; and seeking a path, he found none. Then all at once he saw an old
woman with a nodding head coming up to him; and it was a witch.

"My good woman," said he, "can you show me the way out of the wood?"

"Oh yes, my lord king," answered she, "certainly I can; but I must make
a condition, and if you do not fulfil it, you will never get out of the
wood again, but die there of hunger."

"What is the condition?" asked the king.

"I have a daughter," said the old woman, "who is as fair as any in the
world, and if you will take her for your bride, and make her queen, I
will show you the way out of the wood."

The king consented, because of the difficulty he was in, and the old
woman led him into her little house, and there her daughter was sitting
by the fire.

[Illustration: THE SIX SWANS

    "THE SWANS CAME CLOSE UP TO
    HER WITH RUSHING WINGS; &
    STOOPED ROUND HER; SO THAT
    SHE COULD THROW THE SHIRTS
    OVER THEM."]

She received the king just as if she had been expecting him, and though
he saw that she was very beautiful, she did not please him, and he could
not look at her without an inward shudder. Nevertheless, he took the
maiden before him on his horse, and the old woman showed him the way,
and soon he was in his royal castle again, where the wedding was
held.

The king had been married before, and his first wife had left seven
children, six boys and one girl, whom he loved better than all the
world, and as he was afraid the step-mother might not behave well to
them, and perhaps would do them some mischief, he took them to a lonely
castle standing in the middle of a wood. There they remained hidden, for
the road to it was so hard to find that the king himself could not have
found it, had it not been for a clew of yarn, possessing wonderful
properties, that a wise woman had given him; when he threw it down
before him, it unrolled itself and showed him the way. And the king went
so often to see his dear children, that the queen was displeased at his
absence; and she became curious and wanted to know what he went out into
the wood for so often alone. She bribed his servants with much money,
and they showed her the secret, and told her of the clew of yarn, which
alone could point out the way; then she gave herself no rest until she
had found out where the king kept the clew, and then she made some
little white silk shirts, and sewed a charm in each, as she had learned
witchcraft of her mother. And once when the king had ridden to the hunt,
she took the little shirts and went into the wood, and the clew of yarn
showed her the way. The children seeing some one in the distance,
thought it was their dear father coming to see them, and came jumping
for joy to meet him. Then the wicked queen threw over each one of the
little shirts, and as soon as the shirts touched their bodies, they were
changed into swans, and flew away through the wood. So the queen went
home very pleased to think she had got rid of her step-children; but the
maiden had not run out with her brothers, and so the queen knew nothing
about her. The next day the king went to see his children, but he found
nobody but his daughter.

"Where are thy brothers?" asked the king.

"Ah, dear father," answered she, "they are gone away and have left me
behind," and then she told him how she had seen from her window her
brothers in the guise of swans fly away through the wood, and she showed
him the feathers which they had let fall in the courtyard, and which she
had picked up. The king was grieved, but he never dreamt that it was
the queen who had done this wicked deed, and as he feared lest the
maiden also should be stolen away from him, he wished to take her away
with him. But she was afraid of the step-mother, and begged the king to
let her remain one more night in the castle in the wood.

Then she said to herself,

"I must stay here no longer, but go and seek for my brothers."

And when the night came, she fled away and went straight into the wood.
She went on all that night and the next day, until she could go no
longer for weariness. At last she saw a rude hut, and she went in and
found a room with six little beds in it; she did not dare to lie down in
one, but she crept under one and lay on the hard boards and wished for
night. When it was near the time of sun-setting she heard a rustling
sound, and saw six swans come flying in at the window. They alighted on
the ground, and blew at one another until they had blown all their
feathers off, and then they stripped off their swan-skin as if it had
been a shirt. And the maiden looked at them and knew them for her
brothers, and was very glad, and crept from under the bed. The brothers
were not less glad when their sister appeared, but their joy did not
last long.

"You must not stay here," said they to her; "this is a robbers' haunt,
and if they were to come and find you here, they would kill you."

"And cannot you defend me?" asked the little sister.

"No," answered they, "for we can only get rid of our swan-skins and keep
our human shape every evening for a quarter of an hour, but after that
we must be changed again into swans."

Their sister wept at hearing this, and said,

"Can nothing be done to set you free?"

"Oh no," answered they, "the work would be too hard for you. For six
whole years you would be obliged never to speak or laugh, and make
during that time six little shirts out of aster-flowers. If you were to
let fall a single word before the work was ended, all would be of no
good."

And just as the brothers had finished telling her this, the quarter of
an hour came to an end, and they changed into swans and flew out of the
window.

But the maiden made up her mind to set her brothers free, even though it
should cost her her life. She left the hut, and going into the middle of
the wood, she climbed a tree, and there passed the night. The next
morning she set to work and gathered asters and began sewing them
together: as for speaking, there was no one to speak to, and as for
laughing, she had no mind to it; so she sat on and looked at nothing but
her work. When she had been going on like this for a long time, it
happened that the king of that country went a-hunting in the wood, and
some of his huntsmen came up to the tree in which the maiden sat. They
called out to her, saying, "Who art thou?" But she gave no answer. "Come
down," cried they; "we will do thee no harm." But she only shook her
head. And when they tormented her further with questions she threw down
to them her gold necklace, hoping they would be content with that. But
they would not leave off, so she threw down to them her girdle, and when
that was no good, her garters, and one after another everything she had
on and could possibly spare, until she had nothing left but her smock.
But all was no good, the huntsmen would not be put off any longer, and
they climbed the tree, carried the maiden off, and brought her to the
king. The king asked, "Who art thou? What wert thou doing in the tree?"
But she answered nothing. He spoke to her in all the languages he knew,
but she remained dumb: but, being very beautiful, the king inclined to
her, and he felt a great love rise up in his heart towards her; and
casting his mantle round her, he put her before him on his horse and
brought her to his castle. Then he caused rich clothing to be put upon
her, and her beauty shone as bright as the morning, but no word would
she utter. He seated her by his side at table, and her modesty and
gentle mien so pleased him, that he said,

"This maiden I choose for wife, and no other in all the world," and
accordingly after a few days they were married.

But the king had a wicked mother, who was displeased with the marriage,
and spoke ill of the young queen.

"Who knows where the maid can have come from?" said she, "and not able
to speak a word! She is not worthy of a king!"

After a year had passed, and the queen brought her first child into the
world, the old woman carried it away, and marked the queen's mouth with
blood as she lay sleeping. Then she went to the king and declared that
his wife was an eater of human flesh. The king would not believe such a
thing, and ordered that no one should do her any harm. And the queen
went on quietly sewing the shirts and caring for nothing else. The next
time that a fine boy was born, the wicked step-mother used the same
deceit, but the king would give no credence to her words, for he said,

"She is too tender and good to do any such thing, and if she were only
not dumb, and could justify herself, then her innocence would be as
clear as day."

When for the third time the old woman stole away the new-born child and
accused the queen, who was unable to say a word in her defence, the king
could do no other but give her up to justice, and she was sentenced to
suffer death by fire.

The day on which her sentence was to be carried out was the very last
one of the sixth year of the years during which she had neither spoken
nor laughed, to free her dear brothers from the evil spell. The six
shirts were ready, all except one which wanted the left sleeve. And when
she was led to the pile of wood, she carried the six shirts on her arm,
and when she mounted the pile and the fire was about to be kindled, all
at once she cried out aloud, for there were six swans coming flying
through the air; and she saw that her deliverance was near, and her
heart beat for joy. The swans came close up to her with rushing wings,
and stooped round her, so that she could throw the shirts over them; and
when that had been done the swan-skins fell off them, and her brothers
stood before her in their own bodies quite safe and sound; but as one
shirt wanted the left sleeve, so the youngest brother had a swan's wing
instead of a left arm. They embraced and kissed each other, and the
queen went up to the king, who looked on full of astonishment, and began
to speak to him and to say,

"Dearest husband, now I may dare to speak and tell you that I am
innocent, and have been falsely accused," and she related to him the
treachery of the step-mother, who had taken away the three children and
hidden them. And she was reconciled to the king with great joy, and the
wicked step-mother was bound to the stake on the pile of wood and burnt
to ashes.

And the king and queen lived many years with their six brothers in peace
and joy.




THE SLEEPING BEAUTY


IN times past there lived a king and queen, who said to each other every
day of their lives, "Would that we had a child!" and yet they had none.
But it happened once that when the queen was bathing, there came a frog
out of the water, and he squatted on the ground, and said to her,

"Thy wish shall be fulfilled; before a year has gone by, thou shalt
bring a daughter into the world."

And as the frog foretold, so it happened; and the queen bore a daughter
so beautiful that the king could not contain himself for joy, and he
ordained a great feast. Not only did he bid to it his relations,
friends, and acquaintances, but also the wise women, that they might be
kind and favourable to the child. There were thirteen of them in his
kingdom, but as he had only provided twelve golden plates for them to
eat from, one of them had to be left out. However, the feast was
celebrated with all splendour; and as it drew to an end, the wise women
stood forward to present to the child their wonderful gifts: one
bestowed virtue, one beauty, a third riches, and so on, whatever there
is in the world to wish for. And when eleven of them had said their say,
in came the uninvited thirteenth, burning to revenge herself, and
without greeting or respect, she cried with a loud voice,

"In the fifteenth year of her age the princess shall prick herself with
a spindle and shall fall down dead."

And without speaking one more word she turned away and left the hall.
Every one was terrified at her saying, when the twelfth came forward,
for she had not yet bestowed her gift, and though she could not do away
with the evil prophecy, yet she could soften it, so she said,

"The princess shall not die, but fall into a deep sleep for a hundred
years."

Now the king, being desirous of saving his child even from this
misfortune, gave commandment that all the spindles in his kingdom should
be burnt up.

The maiden grew up, adorned with all the gifts of the wise women; and
she was so lovely, modest, sweet, and kind and clever, that no one who
saw her could help loving her.

It happened one day, she being already fifteen years old, that the king
and queen rode abroad, and the maiden was left behind alone in the
castle. She wandered about into all the nooks and corners, and into all
the chambers and parlours, as the fancy took her, till at last she came
to an old tower. She climbed the narrow winding stair which led to a
little door, with a rusty key sticking out of the lock; she turned the
key, and the door opened, and there in the little room sat an old woman
with a spindle, diligently spinning her flax.

"Good day, mother," said the princess, "what are you doing?"

"I am spinning," answered the old woman, nodding her head.

"What thing is that that twists round so briskly?" asked the maiden, and
taking the spindle into her hand she began to spin; but no sooner had
she touched it than the evil prophecy was fulfilled, and she pricked her
finger with it. In that very moment she fell back upon the bed that
stood there, and lay in a deep sleep. And this sleep fell upon the whole
castle; the king and queen, who had returned and were in the great hall,
fell fast asleep, and with them the whole court. The horses in their
stalls, the dogs in the yard, the pigeons on the roof, the flies on the
wall, the very fire that flickered on the hearth, became still, and
slept like the rest; and the meat on the spit ceased roasting, and the
cook, who was going to pull the scullion's hair for some mistake he had
made, let him go, and went to sleep. And the wind ceased, and not a leaf
fell from the trees about the castle.

Then round about that place there grew a hedge of thorns thicker every
year, until at last the whole castle was hidden from view, and nothing
of it could be seen but the vane on the roof. And a rumour went abroad
in all that country of the beautiful sleeping Rosamond, for so was the
princess called; and from time to time many kings' sons came and tried
to force their way through the hedge; but it was impossible for them to
do so, for the thorns held fast together like strong hands, and the
young men were caught by them, and not being able to get free, there
died a lamentable death.

Many a long year afterwards there came a king's son into that country,
and heard an old man tell how there should be a castle standing behind
the hedge of thorns, and that there a beautiful enchanted princess named
Rosamond had slept for a hundred years, and with her the king and queen,
and the whole court. The old man had been told by his grandfather that
many king's sons had sought to pass the thorn-hedge, but had been caught
and pierced by the thorns, and had died a miserable death. Then said the
young man, "Nevertheless, I do not fear to try; I shall win through and
see the lovely Rosamond." The good old man tried to dissuade him, but he
would not listen to his words.

For now the hundred years were at an end, and the day had come when
Rosamond should be awakened. When the prince drew near the hedge of
thorns, it was changed into a hedge of beautiful large flowers, which
parted and bent aside to let him pass, and then closed behind him in a
thick hedge. When he reached the castle-yard, he saw the horses and
brindled hunting-dogs lying asleep, and on the roof the pigeons were
sitting with their heads under their wings. And when he came indoors,
the flies on the wall were asleep, the cook in the kitchen had his hand
uplifted to strike the scullion, and the kitchen-maid had the black fowl
on her lap ready to pluck. Then he mounted higher, and saw in the hall
the whole court lying asleep, and above them, on their thrones, slept
the king and the queen. And still he went farther, and all was so quiet
that he could hear his own breathing; and at last he came to the tower,
and went up the winding stair, and opened the door of the little room
where Rosamond lay. And when he saw her looking so lovely in her sleep,
he could not turn away his eyes; and presently he stooped and kissed
her, and she awaked, and opened her eyes, and looked very kindly on him.
And she rose, and they went forth together, and the king and the queen
and whole court waked up, and gazed on each other with great eyes of
wonderment. And the horses in the yard got up and shook themselves, the
hounds sprang up and wagged their tails, the pigeons on the roof drew
their heads from under their wings, looked round, and flew into the
field, the flies on the wall crept on a little farther, the kitchen fire
leapt up and blazed, and cooked the meat, the joint on the spit began to
roast, the cook gave the scullion such a box on the ear that he roared
out, and the maid went on plucking the fowl.

Then the wedding of the Prince and Rosamond was held with all splendour,
and they lived very happily together until their lives' end.




KING THRUSHBEARD


A KING had a daughter who was beautiful beyond measure, but so proud and
overbearing that none of her suitors were good enough for her; she not
only refused one after the other, but made a laughing-stock of them.
Once the king appointed a great feast, and bade all the marriageable men
to it from far and near. And they were all put in rows, according to
their rank and station; first came the kings, then the princes, the
dukes, the earls, the barons, and lastly the noblemen. The princess was
led in front of the rows, but she had a mocking epithet for each. One
was too fat, "What a tub!" said she. Another too tall, "Long and lean is
ill to be seen," said she. A third too short, "Fat and short, not fit to
court," said she. A fourth was too pale, "A regular death's-head;" a
fifth too red-faced, "A game-cock," she called him. The sixth was not
well-made enough, "Green wood ill dried!" cried she. So every one had
something against him, and she made especially merry over a good king
who was very tall, and whose chin had grown a little peaked.

"Only look," cried she, laughing, "he has a chin like a thrush's beak."

And from that time they called him King Thrushbeard. But the old king,
when he saw that his daughter mocked every one, and scorned all the
assembled suitors, swore in his anger that she should have the first
beggar that came to the door for a husband.

A few days afterwards came a travelling ballad-singer, and sang under
the window in hopes of a small alms. When the king heard of it, he said
that he must come in. And so the ballad-singer entered in his dirty
tattered garments, and sang before the king and his daughter; when he
had done, he asked for a small reward. But the king said,

"Thy song has so well pleased me, that I will give thee my daughter to
wife."

The princess was horrified; but the king said,

"I took an oath to give you to the first beggar that came, and so it
must be done."

There was no remedy. The priest was fetched, and she had to be married
to the ballad-singer out of hand. When all was done, the king said,

"Now, as you are a beggar-wife, you can stay no longer in my castle, so
off with you and your husband."

The beggar-man led her away, and she was obliged to go forth with him on
foot. On the way they came to a great wood, and she asked,

    "Oh, whose is this forest, so thick and so fine?"

He answered,

    "It is King Thrushbeard's, and might have been thine."

And she cried,

    "Oh, I was a silly young thing, I'm afeared,
    Would I had taken that good King Thrushbeard!"

Then they passed through a meadow, and she asked,

    "Oh, whose is this meadow, so green and so fine?"

He answered,

    "It is King Thrushbeard's, and might have been thine."

And she cried,

    "I was a silly young thing, I'm afeared,
    Would I had taken that good King Thrushbeard!"

Then they passed through a great town, and she asked,

    "Whose is this city, so great and so fine?"

He answered,

    "Oh, it is King Thrushbeard's, and might have been thine."

And she cried,

    "I was a silly young thing, I'm afeared,
    Would I had taken that good King Thrushbeard!"

Then said the beggar-man,

"It does not please me to hear you always wishing for another husband;
am I not good enough for you?"

At last they came to a very small house, and she said,

    "Oh dear me! what poor little house do I see?
    And whose, I would know, may the wretched hole be?"

The man answered,

"That is my house and thine, where we must live together."

She had to stoop before she could go in at the door.

"Where are the servants?" asked the king's daughter.

"What servants?" answered the beggar-man, "what you want to have done
you must do yourself. Make a fire quick, and put on water, and cook me
some food; I am very tired."

But the king's daughter understood nothing about fire-making and
cooking, and the beggar-man had to lend a hand himself in order to
manage it at all. And when they had eaten their poor fare, they went to
bed; but the man called up his wife very early in the morning, in order
to clean the house. For a few days they lived in this indifferent
manner, until they came to the end of their store.

"Wife," said the man, "this will not do, stopping here and earning
nothing; you must make baskets."

So he went out and cut willows, and brought them home; and she began to
weave them, but the hard twigs wounded her tender hands.

"I see this will not do," said the man, "you had better try spinning."

So she sat her down and tried to spin, but the harsh thread cut her soft
fingers, so that the blood flowed.

"Look now!" said the man, "you are no good at any sort of work; I made a
bad bargain when I took you. I must see what I can do to make a trade
of pots and earthen vessels; you can sit in the market and offer them
for sale."

"Oh dear!" thought she, "suppose while I am selling in the market people
belonging to my father's kingdom should see me, how they would mock at
me!"

But there was no help for it; she had to submit, or else die of hunger.

The first day all went well; the people bought her wares eagerly,
because she was so beautiful, and gave her whatever she asked, and some
of them gave her the money and left the pots after all behind them. And
they lived on these earnings as long as they lasted; and then the man
bought a number of new pots. So she seated herself in a corner of the
market, and stood the wares before her for sale. All at once a drunken
horse-soldier came plunging by, and rode straight into the midst of her
pots, breaking them into a thousand pieces. She could do nothing for
weeping.

"Oh dear, what will become of me," cried she; "what will my husband
say?" and she hastened home and told him her misfortune.

"Who ever heard of such a thing as sitting in the corner of the market
with earthenware pots!" said the man; "now leave off crying; I see you
are not fit for any regular work. I have been asking at your father's
castle if they want a kitchen-maid, and they say they don't mind taking
you; at any rate you will get your victuals free."

And the king's daughter became a kitchen-maid, to be at the cook's beck
and call, and to do the hardest work. In each of her pockets she
fastened a little pot, and brought home in them whatever was left, and
upon that she and her husband were fed. It happened one day, when the
wedding of the eldest prince was celebrated, the poor woman went
upstairs, and stood by the parlour door to see what was going on. And
when the place was lighted up, and the company arrived, each person
handsomer than the one before, and all was brilliancy and splendour, she
thought on her own fate with a sad heart, and bewailed her former pride
and haughtiness which had brought her so low, and plunged her in so
great poverty. And as the rich and delicate dishes smelling so good were
carried to and fro every now and then, the servants would throw her a
few fragments, which she put in her pockets, intending to take home.
And then the prince himself passed in clothed in silk and velvet, with a
gold chain round his neck. And when he saw the beautiful woman standing
in the doorway, he seized her hand and urged her to dance with him, but
she refused, all trembling, for she saw it was King Thrushbeard, who had
come to court her, whom she had turned away with mocking. It was of no
use her resisting, he drew her into the room; and all at once the band
to which her pockets were fastened broke, and the pots fell out, and the
soup ran about, and the fragments were scattered all round. And when the
people saw that, there was great laughter and mocking, and she felt so
ashamed, that she wished herself a thousand fathoms underground. She
rushed to the door to fly from the place, when a man caught her just on
the steps, and when she looked at him, it was King Thrushbeard again. He
said to her in a kind tone,

"Do not be afraid, I and the beggar-man with whom you lived in the
wretched little hut are one. For love of you I disguised myself, and it
was I who broke your pots in the guise of a horse-soldier. I did all
that to bring down your proud heart, and to punish your haughtiness,
which caused you to mock at me." Then she wept bitterly, and said,

"I have done great wrong, and am not worthy to be your wife."

But he said,

"Take courage, the evil days are gone over; now let us keep our
wedding-day."

Then came the ladies-in-waiting and put on her splendid clothing; and
her father came, and the whole court, and wished her joy on her marriage
with King Thrushbeard; and then the merry-making began in good earnest.
I cannot help wishing that you and I could have been there too.
